Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Stephen Morris. He's associate
professor of philosophy at the College of Staten Island
slash CUNY. And today we're going to talk about
his book Moral Damages The Case for Abolishing Morality.
So, Doctor Morris, there it is. Doctor Morris, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to have everyone.
It's a pleasure to meet with you, Ricardo.
So, before we get into moral abolitionism, which is
the main topic of your book,
how
do people commonly approach and think about morality?
It's a great question. It's a very complex question.
Uh, THERE, there's no one single way, uh, that,
that people, uh, across the world and across time,
uh, think about morality. Um, BUT we have a
much better understanding of how people generally conceive of
morality now, uh, than we did in the past,
uh, and we're still learning, of course. And, uh,
although there is a lot of variation both between
how people generally conceive of morality and certainly specific
ethical beliefs, and I'm gonna use morality and ethical,
uh, inter interchangeably. Um, SO, yeah, even though we
find this variation, we do find a lot of
similarity, particularly involving, uh, some, some fundamental aspects of
people's moral views. And these include things like, and,
and again, there, this, this is controversial. So I
should say that, uh, somewhat controversial. There, there's, there's
no uh complete consensus, but again, the, the research
indicates that there are these fundamental elements. OF people's
uh moral views, including, um, what's sometimes referred to
as moral objectivism, this idea that whatever moral facts
exist, they transcend individual opinions or cultural norms. Um,
THERE'S also the idea of obligation that, uh, moral
facts, uh, moral requirements are somewhat, uh, are somehow
obligatory on all of us to act in accordance
with. Um, THERE'S a close connection, and I'm gonna
focus on this throughout my talk. As I do
in the book, close connection between morality and punishment
and blame, uh, very, very similar concepts, a very
specific notion of blame. Uh, AND, and this is
perhaps the most controversial, uh, aspect of my, my
conception of, of the kind of morality that I
attribute to most individuals, uh, non-hilosophers, laypersons, or, or
What we call the folk. And that is this
retributivist element. Now, think of retributivism as a sort
of blame, uh, the, the, the sort of eye
for an eye basis for punishment, right? That, uh,
people are punished in a way that fits with,
uh, their, their actions, their responses, uh, to their
actions. If they've done bad, uh, they deserve punishment,
if they've done. Good, they would deserve some sort
of reward. Uh, WHERE the punishment and reward, uh,
corresponds to the degree of rightness or wrongness or
rightness of their actions, right? So, uh, think about
punishment. If you're punishing someone on retributiveist grounds, you're
doing it just because they, in a sense, deserve
to be punishment, be punished. It's intrinsically right. Uh,
THIS is different from punishment, let's say, with an
eye towards shaping their behavior or deterring others, uh,
having some sort of consequentialist stand in the future.
So, um, in my book, then, I, I use
a, a notion, uh, of, um, morality that I'm
arguing we ought to abolish that contains these elements,
uh, objectivism, it's realist, uh, uh, it is, uh,
tied closely to blame, uh, and retributism.
Uh, AND what is moral abolitionism then? What does
that mean and what is the kind of moral
abolitionism you are arguing for in the book?
OK. So, the moral abolitionism basically is to try
to eliminate insofar as possible, all remnants of morality
from our deliberations, from our language, um, and, and
from our, uh, social institutions in the way that
society is, is organized. Um, NOW, this can be,
it is easier said than done. Um, BUT nonetheless,
there, there are good reasons for being an abolitionist
about morality. So, uh, one reason that people would
argue for abolishing morality is that if you take
the view that there are no moral facts, which
is a views uh referred to generally. IS error
theory. The idea that, uh, when people speak about
morality, they are assuming or asserting the existence of
moral facts. But as it turns out, there are
no moral facts. And so, and, and I'll talk
about this later on, and so that they're in
error. So one argument, which is not the main
one I should mention, for moral abolitionism is that
Because moral facts don't exist, um, when we speak
about them, we're speaking falsely. So for, uh, uh,
for epistemic reasons, uh, we ought to do away
with this kind of speech, uh, in the same
way that we shouldn't make, um, uh, assertions that
we, that we take to be truthful about unicorns
and the like. Now, the main reason, the other
reason for, uh, abolishing morality is that The claim
is, is that morality in, in, in a particular
sense in the sense that I'm speaking with, uh,
of, uh, actually, uh, causes more harm than benefits
uh for, for uh human society. And so, this
is a purely pragmatic argument, all right? So it's
not an argument, clearly not an argument based on
morality. It's an argument about what would be best
for human beings, for individual lives and for our
lives collectively. And the claim is that we're better
off without morality. And this is certainly a very
provocative and, and controversial and that at the time
where I'm, I'm talking about it, um, not a
very popular view, although it does seem to be
getting, gaining some traction, um, And so, one of
the main um uh uh things I'm trying to
accomplish in this book is get a dialogue going,
you know, is morality, uh, a good thing overall
for, for humanity, as, as virtually everybody thinks, and
I'm gonna argue, no, it's not.
Right, and we're going to get into more detail
in in terms of your view of moral evolutionism
later on in our conversation. But tell us now
about the analogy you established in the book between
morality and the sickle cell trait.
OK. So, I, I use the analogy comparing uh
the human moral faculty to the uh sickle cell
trait in human beings. And I think there's a
lot of similarities between the two. NOW, a, a
major part of my project in, in this book,
um, moral damage is the case for abolishing morality.
Is that, uh, morality, the moral faculty is, is
an adaptation. It was selected for because it conferred
survival advantages onto our ancestors, OK? Uh, NOW, this
is a very, uh, this view is not, I,
I would say there's no, it's not a unanimous
opinion among Uh, philosophers, but it, it, it's becoming,
I think, the, the most, uh, or, or becoming
very accepted. I, I think particularly among moral psychologists,
uh, among scientists who look into morality, right? This
idea, you know, how, where does this, this, uh,
Um, propensity to, to, to think of the world
in moral terms come from. And, uh, the best
sort of explanation that I've seen, and again, I
think a lot of psychologists, uh, evolutionary biologists, neuroscientists,
and, and a lot of increasing numbers of philosophers,
I should say, would back me up on this.
It's that we developed this because it was extremely
important to help our ancestors cooperate in groups, right?
So, uh, certainly, there's other facets of our Uh,
psyche, we have empathy, we have our, you know,
prudential considerations that, that lead us to cooperate with
individuals. Um, BUT oftentimes, those sort of catalysts to
cooperative behavior can be overrun by selfish reasons we
have. And so, the idea is morality is a
sort of, uh, as, as a bulwark or an
extra layer of support to, uh, get us to
act, um, uh, cooperatively with other people. OK. So,
now, uh, As it is an adaptation, I, I
agree with the, the consensus view here that morality
was generally very uh important in, in conferring survival
advantages to our ancestors, OK? In the same way,
and this goes back to the sickle cell trait.
Uh, THE sickle cell trait was very important for
helping our ancient ancestors, uh, resist malaria, OK. Um,
But in more modern times, for several reasons, these
traits, uh, I argue now are maladaptive. Certainly, the
sickle cell trait, um, although it can make one
more resistant, uh, to malaria, it brings its own
ill health effects that generally make it maladaptive, OK?
And, and furthermore, we don't really need uh the
sickle cell trait anymore, at least insofar as we
have access to certain kinds of drugs, uh, that
can actually fight off malaria, all right? So, uh,
Sickle cell used to be adaptive, no longer adaptive,
and it's, it's no longer necessary because at least
for most populations, since we have drugs that can
deal with it. Likewise, I argue, although morality used
to be adaptive, adaptive in, in small close-knit groups,
um, in competition with other small close-knit groups, uh,
it no longer is. All right. So, uh, with
the onset of agrarian civilization, about 10 or 1000
or so years ago, a little bit before that,
we're talking and And the preceding late Pleistocene period.
Um, MORALITY, I'm, I'm arguing has generally been maladaptive.
Uh, ALTHOUGH it certainly has its advantages, still does,
I'm gonna argue that overall, it's no longer adaptive
and, and is more overall harmful than helpful. And
like the drugs that can treat malaria, I think
we have non-moral resources that can provide us with
the advantages that morality used to confer and still
confers, um, with, uh, without all the negative baggage,
uh, that comes along with morality.
So you mentioned there our morality has been the
result of evolution and how our moral faculty holds
its existence to evolutionary factors and you mentioned that
they involve our the propensity to encourage cooperation among
our ancient ancestors and people today. But what other
theoretical and empirical arguments do you have against the
existence of objective moral truths?
Yeah, so there's, there's a lot of different kinds
of arguments. I'll just give a, a, a summary,
Ricardo, and if you'd like me to go into
detail, feel free to ask. So, um, And again,
let me make sure I understand the question. So
the, the question is about, uh, why I, I
believe morality doesn't exist. Was, was that the primary
question? Uh,
I mean, the the main theoretical and empirical arguments
against the existence of objective moral truths.
Objective moral truths, great. Um, YES, uh, thank you
for the clarification. So there, there's, I'll, I'll talk
about some of the major arguments that have been
given that, that I find persuasive. So, um, probably
the, the, the first major argument, uh, that was
given, well, uh, at least in contemporary times, uh,
for why moral truths most likely do not exist,
uh, comes from the error theorist JL Mackey. Again,
error theory is the claim that moral truths don't
exist. When we assert them, we're speaking in error.
And uh he used his so-called argument of queerness
to say that if moral truths existed, they'd be
very strange, um, unlike anything else that we're aware
of, and this gives a sort of a a
reason to reject them, right? So the idea is
that if, if moral truths exist, and he had,
he conceived the morality as the way I, I
argue most people do in this objective sense that
transcends, uh, individual, uh, viewpoints or cultural perspectives. If
they exist, uh, they are sort of categorically binding,
right? So, regardless of what we want, regardless of
what desires we have, uh, there are still, if
these facts exist, moral reasons for us to do
something. And this idea that you can have a
reason for doing something that doesn't correspond with any
desire that you have, is one of the things
that he found very strange. Another thing he found
very strange is this idea Um, how would we,
uh, come to perceive these moral facts? There would
have to be some sort of, uh, uh, intuitional
ability we have, uh, that again, seems like, unlike
anything that we're aware of, um, because it doesn't
seem, despite what a lot of philosophers say, that
we can come to know moral truths through, um,
uh, a priori reasoning or, or, um, empirical observations.
It would have to be some other sort of
extrasensory, uh, extra sensory intuition we have, which seems
very strange. OK. So that, that's one argument against
the existence of uh objective moral truths. Another one,
and, and, and one that I find actually uh
more uh compelling is the arguments against free will.
Now, this is a very complex subject, philosophers are
still arguing about this. Um, And they will into
the foreseeable future, I'm sure. Um, BUT there are
very strong arguments against free will, and Although, again,
there's no consensus on what free will even means,
and this is, this is complicated this subject along
with morality, I should say, for a long time.
Philosophers sort of like having these verbal disagreements because
they can't agree with these, these philosophical terms mean.
But I think, uh, part of the, the research
that I, that I began with some colleagues back
in the early 2000s sought to clarify. What, what
the folk or or non-hilosophers understand free will to
be. And this has been actually clarified, I think
even more so by the work of moral psychologists
like Aimm Sharif and, and Corey Clark, um, and,
and they've come to, uh, I, I, I think,
really help establish the view that, that the folk
understanding of free will is. IDEA that we are
in a sense, uh very roughly put uncaused causers,
OK. Uh, IF we have free will, we're not
determined to do what we do. We just uh
uh uh the reality of free will kind of
corresponds to our, uh, experiences of it. You know,
if I'm deciding what ice cream to choose, I
just choose strawberry over vanilla, OK? And, and nothing
caused me to do that. OK. Um, AND, and
this understanding of being an uncaust, uh, certainly a
lot of philosophers believe, and, and some individuals that
believe that we can have free will, even if
we are determined. But I argue that all these
arguments fail. Uh, THERE, there are certainly very compelling
arguments against having any sort of free will. And
and why am I talking about free will, by
the way? Um, THE reason I'm talking about free
will is if there is a consensus among philosophers,
it's, uh, considered, it's the view that free will
is necessary to be morally responsible. OK. So, if
we don't have free will, um, in a sense,
we cannot be morally responsible where, again, this moral
responsibility can be understood in different ways, but typically,
it's understood if you're not morally responsible, um, it
would be inappropriate, uh, to, to, um, attribute moral
blame or moral praise to you. All right. So
the idea basically, if there's no free will, Again,
this is not uh a consensus view, but, but
one way to think about free will, if there's
no free will, there's no morality. I certainly believe
that to be true, um, A lot of uh
free will skeptics believe that as well. So, uh,
I, I, I believe that the arguments against free
will give us really good reason to believe to
reject the concept of morality that, that most individuals
have. OK. Uh, BEYOND that, there are empirical reasons
for error theory. I spoke about the evolution of
the moral faculty. Uh, AND if this is true,
the basic idea behind this, this is also sometimes
called moral nativism. I'm gonna try not to throw
too much jargon out there. Um, BUT the idea
is that if morality evolved, OK, then we would
believe in These moral claims, and we would make
moral claims, even if they had no actual existence.
OK. The idea is the moral faculty evolved not
to help us perceive actual facts in the world,
but just to cooperate, OK? Um, THE, the moral
psychologist Jonathan Haidt makes an analogy between our, uh,
sense, uh our perception of taste, right? Uh, THERE,
there's no inherent, um, property of sweetness out there
in the world, right? It's just something our brains
have sort of conjured up, uh, to drive certain
behaviors, namely, to get us to eat certain kinds
of, um, foods that, that are safe, that are
not toxic, uh, that can provide a quick source
of calories and so forth. So, the idea is,
if morality did evolve, it would be Roughly put
an amazing coincidence if our views about morality actually
tracked facts in the world, OK? And the idea
is, given that um the moral faculty, moral faculty
evolved, there's simply no independent reason to think that
our intuitions about morality track anything in the world,
OK? Um, SO that's another argument against, uh, moral
realism. And then another one which, which is controversial,
these are all somewhat controversial, right? Uh, BUT more
controversial, I'd say, is this idea of that, uh,
the con the power of conscious will is illusory,
right? Now, this goes back to, this has been
discussed a lot. So, uh, I imagine a lot,
a lot of your viewers are already familiar with
the, with the limited experiments and so forth. But
the idea is that, um, the, the idea that
Consciousness actually, if, if it's at all productive of
our actions, it, it tends to promote, uh, produce
a lot fewer actions than we are aware of,
right? So, if we do any actions pretty much
in our conscious state, you know, whether I'm picking
up a, a marker or drinking something or speaking
to you, I think that I'm consciously willing uh
this to happen. But what neuroscientific research has shown
is that a lot of, uh, a lot of
times, most of the time in We seem to
be wrong, right? That, uh, generally, it's, it's unconscious
processes that are, that are sort of making us
behave automatically. And then our consciousness, uh, sort of
interprets this, um, to, to uh understanding that we
are the causes of this. But now, now, again,
like I said, this is controversial, this is ongoing.
But I certainly think the neuroscience points in this
way. I mentioned Jonathan Haidt. He thinks that as
much as 99% of our quote unquote intentional actions
might actually be caused by these unconscious processes. Now,
if this is true, if our consciousness plays a
much weaker role in producing our actions that we're
aware of, uh, then we would seem to lack
free will for these over these actions and therefore,
uh, we would not seem to be morally responsible
for them. So, those are some of what I
consider to be the strongest arguments um against the
existence of, of, uh, objective moral truths.
So earlier, you've already mentioned error theory and also
you've also talked a little bit about retributivism. So
tell us about the particular kind of error theory
that you espouse in the book, namely retributivist moral
anti-realism.
Right, so, I, I, I'm attacking a very what
a lot of people consider to be possibly an
overly narrow understanding of um Of, of moral realism,
right? So, what I'm calling um retributivist, uh, moral
realism, right? And as I mentioned, so this is
the kind of, of moral realism according to which,
um, there are these moral facts out there in
the world, moral properties in the world, uh, that
are attributable to human beings, and which warrant. RETRIBUTIVIST,
uh, either attitudes or behaviors toward them, right? Uh
SUCH that if someone acts in a way that's
morally wrong, genuinely morally wrong, they are appropriate targets
of retributivist actions. OK. So, think eye for an
eye, right? So, uh, you, you stole something, you're
morally wrong for doing that, you need to be
punished. And and because it's retributist, um, the, the
more consequentialist forward-looking purposes of, of, uh, punishment are
thrown aside. Now, I'm not saying people don't sometimes
punish for forward-looking purposes. They clearly do. But as
the way in the, in the sense that most
people think of morality, I argue. There's this uh
uh integral uh retributivist component that, that can't be
separated from it, right? So, to say someone's morally
wrong, at least is in part to say that
they deserve to be punished, um, for on retributivist
grounds, strictly retributist grounds. Now, uh, what I'm arguing
is that the kind of uh moral realism that's
Required uh to justify those retributivist judgments are all
wrong, OK? So, uh, the, the kind of error
theory that I'm arguing is that when any, whenever
anybody makes a, a moral assertion that implies, um,
the appropriateness of retributivism towards an individual, they are
in error, they're wrong. All right. And, and I,
I, I can talk about this later. So 11
question I think a lot of people would have
is, well, yes, if you understand morality in this
very narrow way, that um imparts retributivism, well, sure,
that might not exist, but there, why think of
morality like that? There's, there's certainly other ways to
think about it. It doesn't have to be retributivist,
it can be purely forward-looking. There are these constructivist
accounts of morality and so forth. Um, AND I
could talk about this in more detail. Later. But
my basic response is, when we talk about morality
in different ways, and I think philosophers have a
very nasty habit, not intentionally, perhaps, but understanding terms
in different ways. Whether it's free will, uh, moral
realism, um, What have you. When they talk about
it in this different, these different ways, not only
does it add unnecessary confusion, uh, to the issue,
but it makes it very difficult to make any
sort of progress on these debates because philosophers really
are speaking past each other. So, uh, one of
the main project, uh, uh, main aims of my
book is to try to get philosophers and, and
scientists on the same page, uh, about what morality.
IS. And I think the best way to do
that, and I'm not alone in saying this, is
that we should speak of these philosophical terms in
a way that corresponds to the way that non-hilosophers
or non-academics generally conceive of them. And as I've
talked about, because the folk, when they, generally, when
they talk about morality, they are imparting retributivism. They
are making a, a, a, a judgment that is,
is, um, to it has retributivism as a central
component. OK. So, if we want to then revise
morality, to be like, oh, no, it just means
doing nice things for people, um, we're, we're gonna
be confusing people, right? Because if that's all I
mean, is that, oh, when I say this person
acted morally, let's say they're, they're doing something nice
for somebody. Then if I say, you know, such
and such is moral, this could reinforce these, these
uh alternate conceptions of morality, right? When somebody hears
me saying morality in a sense, it doesn't impart
retributivism, because I don't specify that, uh, they might
think of me as, as actually, um, uh, espousing
this idea that, yeah, there is retribuous moral realism.
Uh, AND, and so, that's why I think it's
important that we settle on specific philosophical notions. In
this case, moral realism. That correspond uh to to
how the folk view them, and the folk view
them as having this this uh important retributivist component.
And what do you think about alternative concepts conceptions
of morality, like, for example, a constructivist moral perspective
based either on cultural or personal values.
Good, and this really sort of dovetails nicely with
the last question. So, let's say We all come
to agree, which I don't see happening anytime soon,
uh, that there is no what I'm calling retributivist
moral realism. That is, uh, retributivism is never, um,
a, a, a justifiable attitude or behavior towards innovative
body. It just doesn't exist. It, it's not pertinent
to human beings. OK, fine. Well, why don't we
just preserve morality and understand it in a different
sense. So let's revise the term, right? Um, And
there's been a, a bunch of different ways that
that philosophers have, have thought about revising the terms.
So, uh, you mentioned constructivist accounts. Um, ONE constructivist
account is, is called, uh, referred to generally as
Kantian constructionism, named after the philosopher Kant. Um, AND,
and the basic idea here is that there are
these sort of, they may not be these mind-independent
moral properties, but there is some sort of mind-independent
property that, um, is, let's say, non-objective, OK? So
we can get rid of objectivism, um, and, and
that can, uh, form the basis of of an
account of morality. Now, I think if we look
at these Accounts of morality and detail. So John
Rawls and, and his notion of um justice and
fairness, I, I, I think is a really good
example of this. And the problem I see for
a view like this, even though I think there's
a lot to say in favor of it, is
I think it tries getting objective moral properties in
through the back door, right? So, what do I
mean by that? So, without going into the details
of Rawls's account, um, He suggests that if we're
trying to find out what kind of principles of
justice there are that we should abide by, we,
we should use this thought experiment where we're sort
of at this um um pre-moral state where a
bunch of these individuals come together and decide what,
what society would be best for them based basically
on self-interest. And, but, but one thing that he
does is he builds this concept of fairness into
the, this, this theoretical construct, right? That sort of
uh restricts the kinds of, of rules that will
come out of it. And in doing that, he's
essentially saying, well, let's assume that fairness is an
objective moral good, uh, that, that any society should
abide by. So, that, that's why I think uh
uh the, the Kantian constructivist views really, uh, I,
I think are another form of, of Or fall
come very close to, to moral objectivism, and so
fall prey to the kinds of objections uh for
error theory that I mentioned. Another account is referred
to sometimes as human constructivism. This is where you
get the sort of relativistic views, right? Where, let's
say in individuals, there's, there's different variations of all
these views I should mention. And um, so an
individual's own views about morality or maybe society's views
about morality, um, Can shape what morality is to
me. So think subjectivism and relativism, right? So if
you're a moral subjectivist, roughly speaking, uh, moral right
and wrong for you is determined by your own
views about right and wrong, right? If you think
stealing's wrong, then it's wrong for you to steal.
If you think stealing is OK, it's not wrong
for you to steal. Um, WHEREAS, um, ethical relativism,
sometimes referred to as cultural relativism, is the view
that, um, our moral obligations stem from what our
society, the greater culture that we're in, uh, believes.
But the problem with these views is I, uh,
they, they seem not to be unable to ground.
The retributivist aspects of people's moral views, right? Um,
NOT to mention it makes, there's a bunch of
other objections against these zoos, but I, but I
think that one of the main ones is that
it makes it very difficult to ground retributivism, right?
So, I, I use the example in a book.
Imagine that you have this sort of odd cultural
norm where the death penalty is uh deserved for
uh what we would consider being extremely trivial, um,
um, crime, all right? Um, YOU know, maybe, maybe
when you're walking, you start with your right foot.
That's not the example I used. And let's say
that you, you know, society is really just sort
of, uh, uh, uh, hammer this into your brain,
you fully accept it and so forth. And, and
one day something happens, you're startled and you start
walking with your right foot, and then someone's like,
uh, 00, you violated the number one rule of
our society, you need to be put to death,
OK? Because they believe that on retributist grounds. So
let's say you agree, oh yeah, but um, I,
I think from an objective standpoint in a sense,
or or or at least from a strong intuition.
A person is not deserving of retributivism, right? So,
um, I, I think a lot of those constructivist
views can't ground retributivism. Uh, THE forward-looking arguments, uh,
fall prey to the same kind of objection, right?
That I've talked about before. If, if, and, and
a forward-looking argument, by the way, for morality, I
should just specify, look, when we say people are
morally responsible, we're saying perhaps that they are liable
to be punished, but only in a way that
aims toward um preventing these kinds of, uh, Problematic
behaviors of the future, or maybe deters other people
from doing it, um, or makes them a better
person, right? So you're doing it with a what
what sometimes referred to as a consequentialist aim, OK?
You're, you're, you're punishing now, not for backward-looking reasons.
They did something wrong, they deserve to be punished.
You're punishing for forward-looking reasons. You're try you're trying
to prove something in the future. And we can
just forward-looking punishment, but we do all the time
to animals, right? Um, TO young children. Uh, WE'RE
not saying that they're, you know, inherently evil or
anything like that, but we don't want our dog
to, you know, go to the bathroom on the
floor. We don't want our child to steal cookies
from a sibling or something, right? So we might
punish them with an eye towards their benefit and
towards good things in the future. OK. So, why
don't we just Uh, except a kind of morality
like that. Well, again, on the one hand, and
this is the main argument I have, you are
now revising morality in a way that is too
divergent from how people ordinarily speak about it, OK?
Um, NOBODY disagrees. I don't disagree, no error theorists
disagree, no disagrees, no free will skeptic disagrees that
forward-looking punishment is, um, sometimes preferable and sometimes allowable.
Uh OUR society relies on it, OK? Um, SO
if, if forward-looking punishment and morality was all there
was to morality or, or free will and these
kinds of things, there'd be no disagreement about these
issues among philosophers. Uh, SO the very fact that
there is this disagreement shows that forward-looking punishment isn't
really what we're primarily concerned about, whether we're talking
about free will, whether we're talking about moral realism.
So the, these revisionist attempts, these, these alternatives to
uh moral. IS more error theory and I, I
should mention. Um, I argue simply don't work. They,
they don't, um, fit the bill of, of how
most people understand morality. It is an in effect
changing the subject, and it, it doesn't go very
far in, uh, helping us, uh, it doesn't really
do anything, I argue, in helping us resolve these
age-old philosophical questions that gave rise to the debates
in the first place, and it just adds unnecessary
confusion.
So this next question will probably also help us
understand a little bit better why you think that
the belief in morality does humanity more harm than
good. So what do we know about the historical
and present role that morality has played in both
preventing and promoting violence?
So, this is one of the main subjects of
my book, right? So this, this gets to, I,
I, I think the aspect of the book that
is most controversial, and that really sort of sets
my book apart from, uh, so far as I
can tell, any other book on the subject of
philosophy that's been written. So far as I'm aware,
um, no other, uh, book of this length or,
or of this depth has tried to uh establish
that, uh, the empirical case that morality causes more
problems than it solves. Uh, AND again, before I
address the, the question, Ricard, I'll just say, you
know, my, my aim here, I, I don't take
my book to be a final word on this
subject, although I do think I offer very compelling
evidence, uh, showing that morality, uh, is problematic, more
problematic than helpful, um, in terms of violence, let's
say, which I'll discuss shortly. But again, I want
to get a dialogue going. So, so, uh, generally,
people, non-moral abolitionists, just assume that, oh, morality is
a good thing. And I, I, I could talk
about that later as well. Um, BUT there's Very
good reason to say that that is generally not
the case, both historically and at present. And, and
violence is a good example. So, certainly, morality plays
a role in inhibiting violence, but it is very
hard to identify when it does that. Because I
think most of the times it does that. These
are sort of, you know, battles inside of people's
brains where they're deliberating, uh, man, this person makes
me really angry, or do I want to join
this violent gang or this, this, this army or
something. Um, AND, and maybe there's moral considerations that
lead them, um, that inhibit them from, from doing
these things or engaging in violence. So, it, it
is, uh, the, the, I should say it, the,
my opponents at a disadvantage here because there are
a lot clearer, uh, examples of morality, um, causing
violence than preventing violence. Nonetheless, I, I don't think
it, it, it's unfair of me to appeal to
a appeal to these, uh, empirical reasons and, uh,
uh, for, for the, the main reason that as
I'll, uh, after my discussion, hopefully, uh, you and
your viewers will, will agree, um, it's hard to
imagine morality inhibiting, uh, making, uh, uh, making up
for the amount of violence that it's caused in
terms of inhibiting it, right? Uh, SO, what are
Some of the ways that morality causes violence. Well,
in the book, I separate it between small scale
violence and large-scale violence. It's really hard to sort
of make a, a, a clear distinction between the
two. I, I, I think I define small-scale violence
somewhat arbitrarily as, as uh acts that take the
lives of 250 people or less or something. And,
and Uh, no, so, with, with small-scale violence that,
that's more uh motivated by morality, uh, think of
terrorism, OK? Uh, ACTS of terrorism that affect less
than 250 people, right? Um, THINK of, uh, domestic
violence. A lot of time that is given a,
uh, moral justification, uh, in, in places as we
see, uh, such as India. Where there is a
lot of domestic abuse abuse against women. And, and
women, oddly, um, according to a lot of the
surveys that I've read, uh, actually believe that, uh,
the use of violence from husbands against wives and
so forth, um, women seem to think that's more
justified than, than men, uh, which is surprising and
eye-opening and, and, and unfortunate, I should also add.
Um, So, other sorts of small uh kinds of
violence or small-scale violence. Um, SO think of violence
against outgroups, right? So, violence against women, violence against,
uh, political dissidents, uh, against, uh, the LGBTQ plus
community, um, ethnic, racial minorities. This is all, oftentimes,
sparked by moral reasons. So people perpetuating this violence
think, oh, you know, this group is, is evil,
or they need to be put down. Or I'm
gonna engage in an act of terrorism because I
think it's my moral duty to do so for
my country or my religion or my political group,
right? OK. Um, AND, and, and, uh, I, I
should also say, when I'm talking about acts of
violence, I focus on fatalities, all right? But the
amount of non-fatal injuries resulting from morally motivated violence,
certainly well exceeds the number of fatalities. OK. Still,
the number of fatalities is certainly high. Opening. And
we see that particularly when we talk about large-scale
violence. So here I'm talking about um ritualistic sacrifice
in the distant past, um, the execution of witches,
which is sort of portrayed somewhat graphically on, on
my book cover, um, and uh also war and
genocide, right? So, uh, uh, a lot of commentators
on war, uh, Ian Hinkfuss, uh, Joshua Green, have
basically said, look, without morality, Uh, certainly in recent
times, without morality, uh, being, uh, a useful tool
for to drumming up support for war, it's impossible
to imagine that large scale wars would have taken
place, right? Almost any war. We can think of
in in the past several 100 years, a large
scale war, uh, has been justified on moral grounds,
and this has been instrumental in getting people to
join the cause, right? Um, WE see this in
World War II with Hitler, um, we see it
in the wars of religion, um, 30 Years' War.
Uh, THE, the Muslim conquest of India, all these
kinds of, uh, uh, wars where, where millions of
people, um, perhaps up to a billion people, according
to some estimates, have died, um, that would not
almost certainly have not occurred without people believing that
it was the morally right thing to do to
go to war. Now, In saying this, I allow,
um, and, and we see this even nowadays, right?
So think of Putin, uh, and, and his invasion
um of Ukraine. Uh, HE gave a moral justification
for it, right? One of the moral justifications I
recall is that, uh, well, you know, uh, ethnic
Russians are being persecuted, um. Ukraine was persecuting the
Jewish population or something, and so there are these
moral justifications. Now, I think he's full of garbage.
I don't think he, uh, uh, really genuinely believed
these reasons for going to war, but he still
had to give a moral argument to get his
country in favor of doing it, right? Um, AND
so this is the idea. Even if a leader
doesn't morally believe that going to war or, or
committing Genocide is the right thing to do. Um,
I, I, I think Hitler actually thought it was
the moral thing to do. But even if they
don't, it's important that he get, they get their
country, uh, uh, their citizens and their, their, their
other uh political leaders to agree with it, OK?
And then genocide, oftentimes we find out there is
a, a central, uh, moral justification given for it,
for the Holocaust, um, For, um, the, the, the
uh uh Rwandan genocide, uh, for, uh, the Cambodian
genocide, and, and this idea of racial purity, we
find is, is, is a very frequent contributor to
the justification here. And as I'll talk about, purity
plays a very important role. Uh, A lot of
people in, in, in the West, uh, academics and,
and highly educated individuals. Their moral perspective generally doesn't
include this notion of purity, but it does for
the majority of the world. It has for the
majority of the past. And as I'll talk about,
it, it's extremely damaging. OK. Um, SO those are
some of the ways that morality helps perpetuate. SCALE
violence, small-scale violence. And so, uh, I, I, I,
I know that the philosopher, uh, um, uh, and,
and error theorist and, and opponent of more abolitionists,
I should say, uh, Richard Joyce, uh, who, who
I'll, I'll talk about in more depth in a
moment. Um. Uh, I forgot I was uh going
there first. Oh yeah. So he makes the case
that he, one of the reasons he rejects moral
abolitionism is that he thinks, look, we can't really
establish, for instance, that morality has caused more violence
than it's inhibited. And, and I agree with that,
right? There's, we, we, we have a lot of
empirical information, so I think we can make a
very compelling case for it, but we'll never know
a complete answer, right? Um, NONETHELESS, and, and, and
I'll, uh, I'll, I'll end this, uh, uh, question
by saying this. Um, IT'S just simply hard for
me to imagine that whatever role morality's played in
preventing violence, it balances out the millions or billions
of lives that have either, uh, been killed or
severely wounded, and, and the other lives have been
devastated by loved ones and, and friends and died
um from uh violence caused by morality. And, and
so because of that, I, I, I think it's,
it's, uh, I, I think the burden, the philosophical
burden of, of proof is on uh anybody who
thinks that morality is actually more of a preventer
of violence, uh, um, uh, than a, than a
catalyst for it, especially since when it comes to,
and I'll, I, I, let me, let me say
this one thing to, to sort of motivate my
position. So, when it comes to preventing violence, There
are a lot of non-moral factors that prevent people
from engaging in violence. And so, I think one,
important study that was done is I think that
in World War 2, something like, I, I, I
can't recall the exact number, but something, and, and
you feel free to everybody out there to research
this on your own, uh, to verify. Um, BUT
something like only 20% of soldiers in the field
in World War II, like, fired their guns like
at the opponent or something. Um, EVEN though Not
only was it not considered immoral to do it,
but there were moral reasons for doing it, right?
So, a lot of the training was to try
to get the soldiers to think they are the
enemy, they're immoral, you have to kill them. It's
your moral duty to do that. And most still
couldn't do it, right? And what does this show?
This shows that we don't need morality to inhibit
violence. Sometimes, sure, it does. But a lot of
times we have these non-moral um aspects of our,
our, um our, our, our psyche that, that is,
is sufficient for preventing violence. Uh WHEREAS when it
comes to promoting violence or, or uh uh perpetuating
violence, oftentimes, moral reasons are the main reasons, and
without them, violence like, uh, uh, particularly on a
large scale, wouldn't be committed.
So I think that you probably already partly answered
this next question when you talked about their uh
about uh war particularly, but how does morality influence
politics?
Yeah. Um, SO I, yeah, so this is, and
we're, we're seeing this played out in real time,
by the way, particularly in the United States and,
and across the world as well, right? Um, SO,
I, I'll start by, um, giving a quotation by
Donald Trump, President Donald Trump, uh, in, in a
2023 meeting of, of, of CPAC, where he said,
I am your justice, I am your retribution. Right?
So, clearly, morality plays an important role in politics
all across the spectrum, all right? And I, I,
I think, obviously, Donald Trump is a polarizing figure.
Um, MANY on the right support him, uh, in
the United States, I, I should mention, uh, uh,
support him fervently, whereas a lot on the left,
uh, really despise him. Um, BUT both sides have
very strong, what they consider to be very strong
moral reasons uh for, for their position. OK. Um,
SO, when I'm talking about in, in the book
and the chapter, when I talk about morality and
politics, my argument is that morality, um, Generally today,
but almost certainly in the past as well, causes
more problems than it solves. Uh, MORALITY, when it's
involved in political decisions, we tend to have worse
political decisions. And, and, and how do I cash
out worse? Just think in terms of beneficial outcomes.
OK, so, so what's some evidence for that? So,
um, generally speaking, the research indicates that liberal policies,
politically liberal policies tend to promote better outcomes than
conservative policies. Now, there are exceptions, of course. I'm
not saying that all liberal policies are good, all
conservative policies are bad, but generally speaking, when we
talk about uh conservative economic policies, for instance, so,
uh, deregulation, Uh, supply side economics, uh, not providing
universal healthcare, um, eliminating programs for the social safety
net. Research shows that when these, uh, these policies
are put into place, a society generally does worse
off. We see things like lower life expectancy. I'm
talking, again, I, I'm, I'm gonna be talking specifically
in the United States, and I should mention, um,
it, it, it There are, there's wide variation between
different conceptions of conservatism and liberalism. Uh, CONSERVATIVES, as
a group can believe very different things, as can
liberals, particularly across countries. So, across countries, rather. So,
Um, the average conservative in the United States is
much more right-wing than the average conservative in, say,
uh, uh, Europe. OK. Um, THAT said, so, as
I mentioned, a lot of evidence generally shows that
liberal policies do better than conservative policies and producing
good outcomes. So, um, Ocalix, uh, uh, Kazarian, uh,
in, in 2014 and his colleagues did a study
where they actually spent, I, I think, better part
of a decade and a half to two decades
looking at how Europe was shaped, uh, the impact
of Europe on political policies, and they showed that
the liberal policies brought about better outcomes than conservative
policies. OK. Um, CRIMINAL justice. Uh, SO, so, uh,
oh, and, and so, Assuming that someone agrees, yeah,
OK, well, in general, conservative policies bring about uh
better results than liberal policies. But what does this
have to do with morality? As I said, liberals
appeal the moral justifications, conservatives do. Conservatives tend to
uh use more moral justifications than liberals. OK. So,
Um, what's the evidence for this? Well, uh, Jim
Everett and his colleagues in a, in a 2020
study actually showed that conservatives and, and it was
done on, uh, American, uh, conservatives tend to moralize,
um, more issues and make more attributions of moral
wrongness than liberals. All right. So, um, And this
seems to be a pattern that we find that
people who identify as conservatives, generally, objective morality tends
to play a larger role um in their lives
and in their moral views than, than it does
for liberals. I, I, I, I should also mention
Um, stepping outside of the, the, the, the conservative
liberal liberal divide for a second. Um, AN important
study that was done was in 2016, uh, by
Stankoff and Lee. And what they did is they,
uh, tried identifying, um, they, they split, uh, countries
and regions around the world in particular. GROUPS, basically,
geographic groups, but not necessarily. There was also the
Anglo group, which included the United States, Canada, Australia,
and so forth. And then assess them according to
three different criteria, um, morality, uh, religiosity, and, and,
uh, nastiness, which nastiness is a pro-violence attitude. OK.
Um, AND what they found is a, a, a
very strong correlation, uh, well, a, a, a somewhat
weak correlation among individuals, right? That the more moral
somebody was, the nastier they were, the more prone
to violence they were. And, and this was, uh,
also, um, consistent with findings, uh, uh, uh, I
think, uh, by the Global Peace Index as well.
And, um, So, you, you've got this correspondence between
this, this, and, and a very strong correlation, I
should say, between the level of morality of a
given country and or a region and how uh
nasty it is, or prone to violence it is.
OK? Um, WHERE the, the most, the, the, the
Uh, the countries that, that, uh, are considered measures
most moral, all right, by very different measures, they
did a variety of measures to, to, to uh
measure this. Um, THE, the countries that are most
moral tend to be the most nasty, and the
countries that are least moral tend to be the
least nasty. So right there, You get this, this
fairly unique study, I think, which shows a very
strong, now, now they, uh, uh, yeah, a very
strong uh correlation between the level of uh morality
in in the role that it plays in individuals'
lives and, and the greater cultural, greater culture, and
the amount of violence, OK? Um, NOW, stepping more
specifically into politics. So what are some, uh, specific
examples of how morality brings about, um, negative policies?
I, I, I talked about generally conservatives tend to
be more moral, and I don't mean objectively moral.
I'm just, uh, I think about the, the belief
in morality. The, the belief in morality among conservatives
tends to be stronger than that, uh, among liberals,
they tend to be more objective than liberals, liberals
tend to be more relativistic. Um, OK, but you
also find that where morality shapes policies, you have
these very negative outcomes or a negative outcomes where
had the policies been shaped just by, let's say,
self-interest, um, the policies would likely have been very
different, um, and, and much more beneficial. So, in
the United States, think gun control, right? So, what,
uh, there's for, for viewers who aren't aware, um,
there Gun violence in, in the United States is,
is higher than anywhere in the world. Um, WE,
we have more guns per capita. I believe than
anybody in the world. There, there's certainly more guns
than, than citizens in the United States, and more
mass shootings than any country around the world. All
right? Now, from a pure self-interest standpoint, and by
the way, I should mention my alma mater, Florida
State, where I, where I received my PhD, there
was just a mass shooting, uh, uh, a few
days. THAT, that seemed to be spawned uh by
someone with, with white supremacist tendencies, and he was
also diagnosed as having some, some mental concerns as
well. But that aside, the, the, the major concern
here is, why are there so many guns in
the US um where you've had these mass shootings,
where, you know, you, it's typical in the United
States to actually have these drills where students have
to prepare for these shootings. Um, Why do we
have this? Um, IS it because people think it's
in their self-interest to have this many guns? No.
I, I, I can't imagine anybody in their right
mind being informed thinking, oh, we need this many
guns in the United States. The reason why we
have such a lack of gun control in the
United States is the moral arguments given on the
political right. That generally appeal to this, this, this
right to own guns, where they appeal to the
US Constitution, um, to, to make the moral claim
that yes, you know, it's unfortunate that we have
these gun debts, but it would simply be morally
wrong to infringe on someone's right to own a
gun, right? Um, SO that's, that's one example, but
there's, there's plenty of them. Uh, COVID, uh, vaccines
in the United States. Again, from a purely self-interested
standpoint, it seems like, yes, everybody should go get
the COVID vaccine. It, it's, it's generally extremely been
shown, been, been proven to be extremely safe. Um,
AND without it, you know, there have been in
the United States alone, millions of deaths, but people
gave arguments on, again, primarily rights-based, individual rights on
why it's wrong for, for the government to say,
force people to have vaccines or why people should
abstain from having vaccines. Um. But, but there's plenty
of other examples I can use. So, uh, the
basic point where morality gets involved, and, and, and
I should, let me, let me mention this as
well, because this is important. Um, ONE of the
main objections I think to my view is, well,
certainly morality has played a role in some very
important political movements, right? Think of the eradication of
slavery, think of civil rights, um, uh. The push
for universal healthcare in Europe and the United States,
and so forth. And absolutely, I agree, that's correct.
Um, But in terms of, let's say, issues that
were, there were uh sought social justice, right? Uh,
THE eradication of slavery and uh the, the uh
uh extension of civil rights to women or, or
ethnic minorities and so forth. Yes, those, those, uh,
moral arguments did play an important role. Um, BUT
what I think people fail to realize is that
these, um, oppressive institutions were upheld to begin with,
and probably existed because of moral arguments in their
favor, favor rather. So for every argument being given
that they're morally wrong, they are the individuals arguing
it was morally right. And in fact, uh, in
the Confederacy, um, the vice president argued that, you
know, ours is the first, I'm paraphrasing, but, but
uh the, the Confederacy is the first union to
be established on um the natural law view, uh,
the moral natural law view that Blacks are inferior
to whites, right? Uh, SO, so, while I, I
don't deny the role that morality is played in,
and positive political movements, it generally is also responsible
for the negative, uh, uh, movements as, uh, movements
as well. And I don't think you need morality.
Certainly, it, it, it's playing a role, it's played
an important role in the past, but that worm
seems to have turned, right? So we're talking about
social justice. Justice. What do we have now in
the United States, you know, right? So, um, we,
we now have a government that's going again, you
know, opposing social justice seems almost to be like
their main, uh, uh, aim, right? Uh, THE, this,
the, the, the fight against wokeness and so forth.
And I think most people don't even understand what
that means, but basically just refers to, um, being
aware of social, uh, injustice and and trying to
make amends for it. Um, AND, and the, the,
the, uh, political, uh, aims of, of the US
government right now is antithetical to social justice, right?
Um, YOU know, you, you see sort of the
resurgence of the, of the KKK, all this sort
of stuff that I would consider to be awful.
Uh, NOT morally awful. I just really, really don't
like it, and I think it's, it's, uh, uh,
adverse to the welfare of, of the country and
perhaps the world, right? Um, SO, Yeah, so, so,
you know, what I, I, I think, without morality,
to sort of bolster the, these oppressive political movements,
um, these negative political movements, if we just relied
on things like empathy and self-interest, which, again, I'll
talk about more in, in the future, um, in
this, in this discussion, uh, we would have better
policy. Last thing I'll mention, um, is that one
of the main things in the United States is
You know, you, you find, uh, when I talk
about conservative fiscal policy, economic policy, um, clearly, we
see from the Reagan years to today where sort
of supply side economics and deregulation is, um, More
or less been, been one of the driving forces
in, in, in uh economics in the US, you
see a greater and greater discrepancy of wealth that
has clearly been hurting the poor, the middle, and
the working class in the United States. And yet
you find poor and working class uh Republicans, uh,
or a lot of them, particularly whites, uh, voting
Republican. And this is, this is sort of very
odd, right? Because it seems to go clearly against
their, their financial self-interest. But as Jonathan Haidt said,
yes, but according to what their perceived moral interests,
they're doing what they think is right, right? Um,
AND there was a 2019 study by the Cato
Institute. I think Laura Ekins was, was the, um,
the author or conductor of the study. And it's
very interesting because what it showed was that a
lot of the disagreement between conservatives and liberals regarding
economic policy, um, is Driven by moral considerations, particularly
free will, right? And, and in opposition to socialism,
right? With government involvement in, in the, uh, uh,
in the economy to help uh improve the social
safety net and so forth. Um, AND, and it,
and it's very interesting. Again, what it showed is
that people generally have, if you're a Republican, you
think people are responsible for their outcomes, right? Um,
IF someone's poor, they're just not working hard enough,
you know, um, If someone's rich, it's all through
their own efforts. Whereas, uh, liberals, uh, progressives, Democrats
generally have the view that, no, there's a lot
of, even if, if, if personal responsibility plays some
role, there's a lot of external factors that come
into play here that in a sense, make it
unfair that some people have obscene amounts of wealth
while other people are, you know, maybe working multiple
jobs and barely Scraping by. So, um, these are
some of the ways where I think that morality
really results in a negative, uh, political policy, economic
criminal justice, um, that I didn't really go into
criminal justice, but yeah, the, the, the, the retributive
basis for criminal justice that we find in the
United States is responsible for the negative outcomes we
have there, right? So, if we Got rid of
these moral considerations, all right? The good with the
bad, and just relied on things like natural empathy,
OK, um, reason, a better awareness of the, the
factors that shape us, uh, and, and, and self-interest,
you know, prudential self-interest, I think we'd have much,
much better policy in the United States and beyond.
On an individual level, would abolishing morality also impact
individual well-being?
OK. So, this is uh a question and I,
I addressed this in a, in another chapter of
the book. Um, YOU know, would sort of brass
tacks, would we be happier with without morality in
our lives? This is a more difficult question, I
think. I, I, I think the, the sort of
empirical evidence you can bring to uh weigh on
the question of whether Morality has, uh, you know,
it's effect on violence, its effect on politics. I
think you can make a a a very compelling
arguments that uh morality is negative, uh, when it
comes to its impact on, on, uh, violence and
politics. With regard to individual happiness, it's a little
more tricky, but I still think that the ledger
comes out on the side of doing away with
morality, moral abolitionism. The main reason is this, if
we got rid of morality, You know, I don't
see this happening anytime soon, but perhaps in some
idealistic situation, um, that, that I think would be
better off in, in the future. I mean, I
admit I could be wrong about this. I encourage
people to do their own, uh, uh, empirical work.
Um, I, I'm, I'm interested in, in finding coherent
arguments empirically based, particularly that call my conclusions to
the question. But, but, you know, uh, uh, I
earnestly tried to find out what, what, uh, looked
into what the best uh um uh empirical evidence
has to say, and it, it did seem to,
to suggest we're better off without morality. So, when
it comes to individuals, I think overall we'd be
better just because if we got rid of morality,
we would have less violence. We'd have better political
policy, OK? Um, And this is the main reason
why I think overall we'd be better off, but
You also have to consider the role that morality
plays in people's lives, right? And certainly, morality does
seem to be a source of um uh well-being
for a lot of people. It does give them
some, some satisfaction, some happiness. So reflecting positively on
our behavior. Some, some have argued, you know, with
uh one of the things that makes life enjoyable
is to, to look in the mirror and identify
yourself as, you know, you are a morally upright
individual. You're doing the right kinds of things. Um,
I, I agree that that's important, but here's the
thing, I believe that about myself a lot, right?
I, I, I try to be a good person.
I'm not saying I, I always do nice things
and I can't, you know, act problematically sometimes. But
generally, when I look at the mirror I'm like,
yeah, yeah, I think I'm a good person. I
try to do nice things for people and so
forth. And I don't believe in morality, right? So
I, I, I, I am a, a card-carrying error
theorist and, and moral abolitionist. And I still get
that. SENSE of uh satisfaction when I, when I
do things that I consider to be nice for
people, right? Um, I, I sometimes regret things if
I do something negative, negatively to some people. If
I'm overly harsh with my child, um, you know,
reflect back on it, oh man, that was a
bad decision, right? So, I think in rejecting morality,
we wouldn't necessarily have, have to sacrifice, um, that
feeling of gratification we get from uh re reflecting
positively on, on ourselves, our character, our behavior. Now,
A more problematic, uh, aspect of, of being a
moral abolitionist or a moral anti-realist, is that morality,
people who have strong moral views seem to have
a greater sense of purpose and meaning. And uh
the uh the, the Cato Institute article that I
actually mentioned, the 2019 article, um, it actually did
some uh surveys on this, and what it found
is that um people who uh reject free will,
um, And therefore, I think people who probably reject
morality as well, um, have significantly less purpose and
meaning in their life than people who have strong
beliefs and, and personal responsibility, OK? Um, AND that
is problematic because, uh, a sense of, of, of
purpose has been shown to To be a very
positive influence in a person's life. So, um, you
know, if we give up on morality, you know,
do we have to worry about falling prey to
this sort of, well, what's the point? You know,
this, this, this, um, negatively nihilistic attitude on things.
And, and I don't think so. I should say,
also in that article in the Cato Institute, it
showed that, um, Democrats, uh, and liberals also and
and non-religious individuals also have a very low sense
of purpose and meaning, right? So, what, what sort
of came across whereas conservatives generally have a very
high sense of purpose in their lives, but what
came across this article is religions seem to be
playing a major role here, right? That people, it
might have been religion because conservatives tend to be
more religious, um, uh, and, and, and, you know,
religious people tend to have very religiously, um, Inform
morality or or very strong beliefs on free will,
that could explain why, um, you know, these certain
groups have, have, uh, uh, a lot of sense
of purpose in their lives, and the more left-wing,
uh, atheists, agnostic view, uh, individuals don't, OK. But
one, so that is some cause for concern in
terms of individual happiness. Although I will say this,
um, if we break this down to brass tacks,
what we find is that the more religious and
the more moral societies going by stankoff and 2016
analysis are less happy, right? So, the happiest countries
in the world are Scandinavia, New Zealand, um, Japan.
And these tend to be, um, the, the countries
that are less moralistic in terms of, uh, uh,
uh, the, the extent to which they accept objective
morality, and much less religious. OK. So, yeah, you
know, there's some facets of being moral and religious
that, that make you happier than, than average, let's
say. But overall, um, Since the, the less moral
and objectively moral, and let's say when I say
objectively moral, let me make clear, I'm not saying
they're immoral. I, I, I meant the belief in
morality. I call this psych uh psychological morality, as
opposed to metaphysical morality where you actually are moral.
So when I say less moral, I think of,
you know, less of a belief and objective morality,
right? Um, So, yeah, overall, if you want to
be a happy person, live in a society that
is characterized by less morality and less religion. That,
that's what the, the research shows. However, within countries,
again, yeah, there is some evidence that conservatives are
happier than liberals, but a lot of this has
to do with things like system justification, uh, uh,
uh, a failure to recognize the problems in society,
and so forth. Um, But even if one isn't
moral, if one's an anti-realist, if one's a free
will skeptic or non-religious or what have you, um,
evidence shows that individuals who, let's say, engage in
pro-social activities like volunteering, and so forth, have very
strong, um, senses of purpose and meaning in their
lives, right? So it's not hopeless, right? So if
you're a Uh, an anti-realist or a moral abolitionist,
that you're not gonna, you don't have to worry
about going through life without a sense of purpose.
You know, you can find a sense of purpose
in a job or, or what have you, or
a political movement. Um, BUT I think volunteering to,
to help people is, has been shown a very
effective way of finding a sense of meaning and
purpose and happiness in one's life. Um, Yeah, finally,
I, I, I would just uh a couple other
points about um being a a moral anti-realist's connection
to individual happiness. Um, ALTHOUGH there's been some individuals
who have argued, well, if you're immoral, you this
damages personal relationships. I, I, I think that's more
or less been debunked. Um, I, I, I Uh,
this is anecdotal, obviously, but pretty much, I, I
think every anti-realist I've spoken to or, or free
will skeptic has said the same thing, it hasn't
affected our relationships at all with people. And, and,
and it can even be beneficial insofar as, let's
say if you reject, um, retributist moral realism or,
or this very strong sense of libertarian free will,
you're more forgiving towards others. You're more forgiving towards
Yourself, right? Um, IF you don't believe in morality,
you're less likely to feel guilt, which is, uh,
can, can, uh, take away from your happiness. You're
not as likely to be and let's say, the
idea of eternal damnation, which I think more than
any other idea might be responsible for more suffering
for humanity. So, there are some advantages for actually
being anti-realestate. I think. Um, BUT, uh, summary here,
you know, in the grand scheme of things, would
we be happier, be more realist or anti-realists? Well,
it's, it's really hard to tell. But again, I
think because morality, uh, has a negative impact generally
on society, we'd probably be better off if we
lived in an a uh uh uh an abolitionist
world.
So, I also need to ask you, are there
preferable alternatives to moral abolitionism available to error theorists?
Yeah, I, well, obviously I don't think so, but,
but this, I, I, I, I think here, I'm
a lot more open, uh, uh, to opposing points
of view. And I'm, I'm still open to posing
opposing points of view. So, I mentioned Richard Joyce.
Now, Richard Joyce is probably the, the, the most,
the foremost authority on what's known as moral fictionalism.
Now, Richard Joyce is a um Very well-known, very
accomplished, uh, philosopher, uh, and a friend of mine,
even though we disagree on the specifics. We are
both error theorists, OK? But he rejects moral abolitionism,
um, And what he argues for is a position
called moral fictionalism. Now, it's predicated on the idea
that morality generally plays um a beneficial role in
the lives of people and, and society. So, this
is obviously a point which he, he and I
disagree, OK? But what do you Basically argues is
that because fictionalism is beneficial, or I'm sorry, because
morality is beneficial, we ought to try to, he
doesn't like using the word pretend, but it, I
argue it more or less amounts to that. We
ought to pretend to, that, that morality is real.
Now, he doesn't think we should Directly fool ourselves
into thinking morality is real. That, that's a view
that's more associated with a view called moral conservationism,
which is that, yes, error theory is true, but
we can actually believe that moral moral truths hold
when we're not consciously aware of our metaphysical concerns
about morality, right? OF our arguments for error theory
and such. Um, Joyce's view is more along the
lines of, um, he, he, he conveys it to
getting lost in a good movie, right? If we're
in a movie theater and, and we're watching a
movie, and we're really caught up in the plot,
you know, we're identifying with the characters, we're really
sort of empathizing with what's going on, we're feeling
their fears and their excitement, and so. Forth. Um,
IF someone were to ask me, you know, nudge
me during the movie and the seat next to
me and be like, Hey, you know this is
fake, right? I'd be like, oh, yeah, I, I
know it's fake. But, but I'm still caught up
in it and still experiencing it. Um, AND, and
that's sort of the, the idea of moral fictionalism
for Joyce. So he thinks because morality plays an
important role in our lives, We should try to,
to take this view, even though we're aware, if,
if, um if, if asked about it, we, we'd
be aware and we are aware on some level
that morality is fake, we should still try to
be motivated by it, still allow it to play
the role it plays in society since it's mostly
beneficial. Now, I obviously reject this view, um, and,
and one of the reasons I do is that
I think that for Joyce, it's hard for me
to imagine that this sort of pretend morality or
what I'll call moral pretension, um, can really play
that strong of a motivational role in our behavior
if we acknowledge that it's fake, right? And one
way to think about it is this. I, I,
I think a lot of times, even true believers
are able to sort of push aside um moral
scruples if let's say they think their, their self-interest
to be better promoted by something. So, if I
find $1000 in an abandoned wallet with the identification
of the owner, I might think, well, I, I
know it's morally wrong to do it, but I
need the money. I'm taking that, right? Um, SO,
and, and people can rationalize their, their actions, even
if there's sort of moral concerns, right? My, my
point being is it, because it's so easy for
people to ignore, uh, moral consultations of themselves when
behaving, it's gonna be that much easier to do
it if someone acknowledges that. REALLY doesn't exist like
a moral fictionist. So, I just don't see morality
playing, uh, or this this moral pretense playing a
significant role in our behaviors, um, in as much
as Joyce does. Now, Joyce would argue, one of
the things he'd say is, look, we don't need
morality, uh, uh, moral fictionalism to be as strongly
more motivating as a genuine belief in morality, but
as long as it gives us some motivational nudge,
then it's worth having, OK? But the thing, the,
my main objection to him, and something I don't
think he really considers is that the concern is
that by speaking in of morality, in the um
general way that people do. And, and, and he
says, you know, we, we should more or less,
uh again, I, I'm, I'm leaving a lot of
stuff out here, obviously, but, but generally thinks we
should act and speak and deliberate in the way
that we normally do. The main problem I see
for that is that by doing so, you're reinforcing
folk morality, OK? With all the negative things that
go along with it, right? So if Richard Joyce
and moral fictionists go out there and say, um,
yeah, you know, it's, it's morally wrong to steal
or morally wrong to do this or that, I
think most people We're gonna interpret them as, as
speaking, understanding morality in the same way they and
their, their friends and their family did, uh, which
is, oh, yeah, OK, so this person's espousing retributivism.
They're saying this person acted morally wrong and needs
to be punished on retributivist grounds. And that for
the reasons I've mentioned is problematic. So, I think
part of the reasons that that Joyce really fails
to consider this, or, or has in a lot
of his writings, is he just assumes that morality
is overall good. But, but since I believe it's
not, there's a genuine concern that the moral fiction
is is going to reinforce the negative morality that
they think is we should do without. So, all
in all, I think better to just get rid
of the whole thing, given that morality is generally
bad, um, and, and, and go from there.
And what do you make of a forward looking
account of morality like utilitarianism? Do you think that
it could lead to better outcomes than moral abolitionism?
This is another one of those. Perspectives that I'm,
I'm, I'm very open to. I, I certainly think
if, if there were to be a, a global
uh change from uh, uh, uh, a more principle
based, non-consequential deontological perspective morality, which I think most
people have. I, I think utilitarian morality is, is
a very um Uh, uh, recent, uh, development, uh,
in terms of the, the, uh, influence it has
over people. I, I, I certainly think for the
highly educated in the West, it's a, a, a
primary, uh, way of thinking about morality. I think
there's a lot to say for it. I think
if everybody changed their view to utilitarianism, we'd probably
be better off, OK? Um, MOST of the academics
That I discussed in my book at length, whether
we're talking height, whether we're talking Peter Singer, um,
um, Steven Pinker, uh, a lot of these individuals,
they all advocate some sort of forward-looking utilitarianism, right?
So, the, their main aims, the kind of societies
they seem to, to favor, are these very, uh,
liberal societies founded on these utilitarian principle. Uh, NOT,
not, not, not exclusively, perhaps. Um, AND so I
think there's a lot to say for utilitarianism. Uh,
YOU know, Steven Pinker in his, in his excellent
book, The Better Angels of Our Nature, um, has
argued that this sort of shift in the West
towards a more utilitarian, um, outcome-based moral perspective, uh,
rather than a, a, a more dogmatic principle-based the
ontological perspective, has brought about a lot of, um,
Important positive changes in society, such as a decrease
in violence, OK. That said, I would still argue
that we'd be better off trying to push moral
abolitionism than trying to uh uh push, uh, uh,
a utilitarian moral perspective. One of the reasons is
this. I think that moral abolitionism simply is a
much philosophically stronger position than utilitarianism, right? So, the
arguments for error theory. If the arguments for error
theory that I've given are correct, OK, utilitarianism is
false, right? At least as a moral theory. Now,
part of the problem here, and, and we see
this is that, um, assuming uh that error theory
is, is correct, there's simply no objective criterion that
you could uh uh appeal to to try to
convince someone that let's say their, their Kian deontological
perspective is inferior to your utilitarian perspective. Right? Um,
AND, and the fact that we're still ethicists are
still arguing about this, by the way, is indicative
of the fact that there are no moral truths
about this, at least none that we really have
access to. We're having the same debates that we've
had for hundreds of years. No real progress is
being made here. And, and my, my explanation for
this is, there's no more progress to be made.
There, there are no answers about objective worldries. They
don't exist, right? So, um, yeah, if, if you
could, if there was an argument out there that
you could appeal to, to, to uh reliably convert
uh deontologists to utilitarians, I would say, hey, let's
give it a try, but I don't think it's
out there. Um, AND in fact, you see, again,
what one pattern that we see is a lot
of reversal. Um, SO, I, I don't want to
get too off, uh, uh, off track on, on
the present question, Ricardo, but, um, you know, one
of the arguments, uh, that, that people like Steven
Pinker have given, even individuals who are very aware
of morality's problems like Pinker, like height, um, they
seem to subscribe to, uh, the idea that the
sort of moral arc of the universe, uh, is
long and, and tends towards justice, right? Or, or
bends towards justice. Um, THIS idea that, yeah, you
know, society has its ups and downs, but there's
an, uh, uh, Constant upward trajectory. That has been
the case, I think. Um, AND, and I think
this transition to utilitarianism has a lot to do
with it, this transition away from, uh, religious dogma,
um, particularly among political leaders and, and, and, uh,
academic leaders and so forth. But we could very
well be seeing a a change in that trajectory.
And I think the Trump presidency, um, uh, sort
of indicates that, right? Where the, these, um, you
know, a heavily sort of deontological moral perspective based
on, um, let's say religion, for instance, this idea
of, um, you know, retrievatist rightness and wrongness, you
know, giving people their just desserts, this sort of
thing. Uh, IT, it seems to be trending upward,
OK. So, um, I, I don't think we can
really rely on the trend we've seen in the
past since Say the, the early to mid-nineteenth century
to today where there's less violence, more economic prosperity,
more social justice, we are now seeing um moral
forces working against this and turning these trends in
the opposite direction. Uh, GOING back to Joyce for
a uh for a moment, um, so yeah, so,
um. Oh, I'm sorry, for looking at accounts of
morality. Yeah. So one argument against uh utilitarianism is
that there's just no objective criterion by which we
could establish that it's superior to any other ethical
position, because in my view, according to the error
theory, they're all false. Another problem with utilitarianism is,
although it's generally beneficial, it can still have some
very um negative results, OK? So, um, even if
people subscribe to a uh a purely utilitarian view,
um, It could lead to a very sort of
coldness and result in some sort of horrific events.
So, for instance, um, the bombs that were dropped
on Japan, uh, at the end of World War
Two, were basically done on the basis of a
cost-benefit analysis. At least this is what a lot
of, um, Historians believe that, that Truman's decision was
based on, OK, we could end the war now,
save more American lives by dropping the bombs, perhaps,
maybe the war would end anyway, and we would,
we would save some Japanese lives, but American lives
are more important, so let's just drop the bombs,
right? Um, THE extermination of the Jews was done,
uh, partly on the basis of a, a utilitarian
calculation, right? So, without the sort of concern for
other individuals, Right? Without the, the ability to sort
of weigh people's lives uh uh uh as more
or less being equal, utilitarianism can, can give rise
to some gruesome, uh, outcomes, right? So, I, I
don't, tho those are some of the reasons why
I think moral abolitionism, um, informed by empathy, informed
by prudential self-interest, would be better than trying to
uh push this more utilitarian, uh, line.
I think you've already alluded partially to this question
when earlier you mentioned uh how we can compare
societies in terms of how much morality they have.
And you mentioned, for example, the Scandinavian countries, Japan,
New Zealand, and so on. Do human societies need
morality to function well?
Uh, I, I don't. I, I think that morality's
primary use, and the reason why it's so ingrained
in us and why so many people just think
of it as being obviously correct, um, is that
it was so very important for our, our evolutionary
ancestors, particularly, I think, in, in the small groups,
um, Perhaps the onset of early and agrarian societies.
Um, BUT it's no longer necessary. You know, I,
I, I think if we had a society of
moral abolitionists, you know, that were rational, empathetic, had
these other non-moral resources, uh, we would prosper a
lot better. And I think, again, we see that,
um, there, there is at least Suggestive evidence. I,
I keep referring back to the stankoff and Lee
article because I think it's very important, um, where
the, the countries that they identify as being most
moral, most religious, uh, tend to be the less
the least effective in terms of outcomes, in terms
of happiness, in terms of economic prosperity, uh, in
terms of violence, right? Um, AND this is a
major thing, and I, I, I may talk about
this in, in, in a little more depth shortly,
but Most people, certainly most academics, and uh I,
I think David Lewis called this sort, not referring
to the subject, but the argument from the incredulous
stare, right? Where if, if an abolitionist come out,
comes out and says, oh, we're better off without
morality, people just kind of, what are you talking
about, right? IT'S so foreign and preposterous to a
lot of people. And I think that's because people,
academics, you know, and, and, and Jonathan Haidt had
a uh a moniker or an acronym for this
kind of moral perspective that academics share called weird
morality. Um, WESTERN educated, industrialized, rich and democratic. Uh,
AND it's weird, um, primarily because it is not
the norm, whether we're talking historically or, uh, uh,
or whether we're talking most people's moral views in
the world today. Um, WE tend to think of
morality as, oh, and I, when I say us,
I mean us weird, highly educated Western people, right?
We think of morality in terms of, oh, it's
just, you know, showing care for people, not doing
harm. Maybe giving people the freedom to do what
they want, um, and acting fairly. How can that
possibly be bad? Well, generally, it's not, but this
isn't what most people's concept of morality is. Most
people's concept of morality has things like, uh uh
uh involves things like, um, submission to authority, um,
uh, in-group tribal loyalty or loyalty, um, and also
sanctity, purity, which I've mentioned. And these, these, uh,
three foundations, and, and Jonathan Haidt was the one
who came up with this foundational view, um. And,
and this itself was based on another view, uh,
a similar view of, of morality, uh, by, by
Alan Fisk, I believe. Um, BUT, but the idea
is that there's a lot more to morality than
being nice and not harming and letting people do
whatever they want. OK. There, there's the, you know,
uh, enforcing the pecking order, enforcing group loyalty, um,
ostracizing or oppressing individuals who don't meet cultural. And
as a purity, and these forces lead to violence,
OK? So, um, I, I certainly don't think we
need morality to have a successful societies. I think
if we got, did away with it, we do
away with a lot of the problems that, uh,
sort of haunt contemporary society, and we also have
other non-moral resources that can allow us um to,
to persevere and, and, um, be successful.
So earlier I've asked you particularly about the, about
preventing violence, but more broadly, what do you make
of the contributions of morality to the betterment of
society across history? Earlier you mentioned, for example, civil
rights movements and stuff like that. So what do
you make of it?
Yeah, I, I think certainly social justice movements are
very important. Again, moving away from the ancient history,
where it basically just allowed our groups to, uh,
have less infighting and work together and be more
effective at, uh, overcoming challenges, um, both within and
outside of the group, whether we're talking, um, you
know, methods of hunting, uh, methods of, of fighting
other hostile tribes and so forth. But moving towards,
uh, more recent centuries, I think, yeah, morality has,
has played an instrumental role, um, Well, I, I,
I shouldn't say internal, cause I think without it,
we still, we would have achieved a lot of
these accomplishments. But doing away with, with uh slavery,
right? Uh, ALLOWING giving women the right to vote,
uh, extending civil rights, these kinds of things, um,
more concern for handicapped individuals, um, uh, more, more
concerned with the the welfare of outgroups, whether they're
ethnic or religious, or, um, uh, sexual, uh, gender,
what have you. I, I, I think certainly morality
has played an important role here, and I think
it has tended, um, to be generally beneficial. But
again, uh, that's really hard to say though, cause
again, I, I, I, I don't even know, know
if I I'd say generally beneficial because without morality,
you wouldn't have had these, this widespread, let's say,
uh, animosity towards the LGBTQ plus community in the
past or ethnic minorities, or, um, you know, the
the desire to keep women in their place by
not allowing them to vote or get positions of,
of, of, uh, of, of power, right? So, um,
Yeah, so I, I, I think really, at best,
I, I think we can say morality's been a
wash in terms of um promoting social justice, right?
Because again, I, I think it's overdetermined in terms
of social justice. Cause without morality, you would have
still had the groups themselves wanting to not be
oppressed, right? You would still have empathy. Pathetic people
thinking, you know, why are we treating these people
so badly when they act in ways that doesn't
harm us? And they're even maybe beneficial to society.
They're, you know, when it comes to women's suffrage
or leadership, you know, I, I, a lot of
women, I, I'm speaking as an individual, random individual
for like 100 years ago, let's say, or more.
Um, I know a lot of women who are
smarter than men and, and better people, you know,
why? Why should we oppress them? It doesn't really
make sense. Um, YOU know, we, we've become more
reasonable and more rational. So a lot of the,
the stereotypes that we had about women and, and,
you know, ethnic groups and so forth in the
past, um, thanks to, to being, becoming better educated
and, and, uh, with, with the development of science,
science, rather, we, we know that. THOSE old stereotypes
were false, right? So, um, yeah, morality's had a
benefit, uh, but, uh, it, it, it, it, it's
sort of motivated social oppression while it's fought against
it. Um, AND I, I don't really think it,
it was necessary ultimately, to try to overcome these,
these, uh, negative aspects of society. And again, I
think, particularly nowadays, morality seems to be doing, playing
much larger of a role in fostering, um, or
a social injustice than actually trying to promote it.
Again, and, and the United States and in other
countries, we're finding this as well, anti-immigrant sentiment, um,
Uh, scaling back women's reproductive rights, all this sort
of thing, uh, doing away with the, uh, uh,
the DEI initiatives in the United States. Uh, AGAIN,
and, and this is all based on, or at
least given a moral justification, you know, whether Donald
Trump has any real moral views, I don't know,
um, but, but certainly, uh, uh, his, his supporters
do. I would argue most of his supporters do.
And I would argue most of his supporters, for
them, morality is playing much uh uh having a
much stronger role in their lives in terms of
like objective moral truths, playing much of a stronger
role in their lives than it is on, on
the more liberal side.
So you already at least mentioned them earlier, but
tell us more about the three necessary resources you
argue we have at our disposal to benefit humanity
in the world without morality, namely empathy, prudential, self-interest,
and reason.
Yeah. So, uh, a big part of my book
is not just to argue that, you know, morality
doesn't exist, uh, or that morality is bad, but,
OK, well, it's when it comes to error theory,
this is known as the, the what now problem,
right? OK. So, what do we do now? Do,
if error. THEORY is true, if there are no
moral truths, do we become abolitionists? Do we become
fictionalists? Do we just try to, you know, some
other position? Do, are we propagandists? Do we, do
we hide the, the, uh, um, claim that morality
doesn't exist for fear that it might result in
a Lord of the Flies type society? Um, And,
and to, to motivate the abolitionist position, effectively, I
think, you need to point out that, um, yeah,
morality is bad, but certainly, it's got its good
points. Now, um, so if we get rid of
morality, well, do we necessarily have to do away
with the benefits it offers? And I argue that
no, we, we have uh non-moral resources, which I've
already talked about to some extent. We have uh
empathy, self-interest, prudential self-interest, and reason. And I think
that those three elements, Excuse me, are sufficient to
provide us with all the main benefits that morality
is given. Empathy is especially important. And um empathy
basically just the ability, people understand it in different
ways, but, uh, I'm gonna use it in the
sense of it's the ability to understand what somebody
is experiencing and the ability uh to have concern
for, for that individual. HAVE concern for, for their
well-being, let's say. Um, AND, um, research has shown
Pretty much conclusively that empathy is, is highly important
in motivating pro-social behavior, downplaying anti-social behavior, and it's
much uh more of a reliable catalyst for pro-social
behavior and doing away with negative anti-social behavior than
moralities, right? So, certainly, some aspects of morality, you
know, the, uh, Jonathan Haidt's, uh, care, harm Foundation,
uh, fairness Foundation, perhaps. Uh, YEAH, those foundations. Attaches
to the welfare of others, but other moral foundations
work against that, uh, authority, loyalty, oftentimes, uh, purity
and so forth, uh, sanctity. Um, WHEREAS empathy is
pretty much, uh, a guarantee that if you feel
empathy for somebody, particularly empathic concern, you are gonna
want to do what you perceive anyway, to be
in that individual's, uh, um, best interests, right? So,
uh, it, it, it's a very important, um, Fat
to have. Now, self-interest, obviously, self-interest can be a
negative thing. Certainly, uh, a lot of um anti-social
behavior is motivated by self-interest. Uh, THIS is why,
you know, self-interest is the reason why the philosopher
David Hume thought that we needed morality to sort
of overcome the our, our more self-interested uh motives
that lead to um conflict and so forth. But
If we have a better understanding of what's in
our self-interest, I think it will see that it
is actually um more uh conducive to pro-social behavior
than anti-social behavior. Why, why think that? Um, STUDY
after study has shown that, um, the happiest people
tend to be the most altruistic. OK. That volunteering,
for instance, is a huge um contributor to a
person's happiness. They've done studies where they've given people
some money and they, they are either associ uh,
they, they're assigned to either one group that spends
it on others, or a group that spends it
on themselves. The group that spends it on themselves
are consistently happier, right? Um, And so, even though
our, our sort of primitive minds might tell us,
no, you know, we, we need to achieve power
and material wealth in the world, um, and then
you end up being like Elon Musk, perhaps, if
you're fortunate. Uh, IT actually turns out that people
are that are greedy and materialistic are less happy,
right? So, with a, with a more enlightened view
of self-interest, I think rather than leading Under normal
circumstances where, where we have enough resources to get
by on and so forth, in a, in a
society of moderate, uh, uh, wealth, um, I think,
uh, enlightened self-interest, uh, would actually, uh, inform us
that our interests, our, our happiness is in line
with other people rather than being opposed to other
people by, let's say, Best being uh uh attained
by, by fighting them for goods or resources and
so forth. And then finally, um, oh, and, and
by the way, you get sort of pos, what
with the psychological research shows here with regard to
self-interest and happiness is you get this positive sort
of feedback loop. So, uh, generally speaking, if you
act nice towards others, you'll feel good, and then
if you feel good or happy, you take to
be more pro-social, right? So, individuals who tend to
be jerks are less happy. Um, AND, and it
makes sense from a uh uh evolutionary, uh, standpoint,
um, which is kind of an account I give
of how altruism evolved. I, I, I won't talk
about that right now, but, but basically, self-interest is
very happy, uh, very happy, uh, uh, very important
in terms of understanding. How we can have a
more pro-social society. So, if we learn, if, if
we understand the research indicating that pro-social behavior contributes
to happiness and that happiness in, in, in turn
contributes to pro-social behavior, um, that's the way that
a society can really prosper. Uh, FINALLY, reason, um,
Reason, uh, uh, again, and I'm appealing to the
empirical work here. So, research indicates that intelligence is
highly correlated to less violence, uh, less dogmatism, um,
and actually, uh, increased empathy, uh, for, because the
ability to, to, to, uh, do perspective taking and
understand uh how others are feeling. OK. Uh, AND
so, the ideas, and also intelligence, sure, it's innate,
but, but it can be improved by things like
education, right? So in a society that, that is
more geared towards critical thinking and, and boosting intelligence
through things like education, you would have again, positive
outcomes, um, And also, with intelligence, uh, and reason,
you're able to understand how best to achieve the
happiness that we want in our lives, OK? And
then finally, it's, I'll say that, uh, going briefly
back to, to politics, um, there are both empathy
or each of empathy, self-interest, and reason are attached
to beneficial public policies. So, for instance, liberals tend
to be more empathetic. I mentioned how liberal policies
generally Produce better outcomes than conservative policies, um, self-interest,
I mentioned that if we voted basically on self-interest
rather than these deontological moral, um, perspectives, we probably
have better public policies, whether we're talking gun control,
um, a progressive taxation, what have you, and then
also a reason, obviously, if we, uh, if reason
plays a greater role in our lives, we'll probably
have more effective, uh, political, um, policies.
Why do you think that even most of the
scientists themselves, including the moral psychologists, share the opinion
that morality is an indispensable ally in the quest
for a better future?
Yeah, so I, I alluded to this a little
bit ago, but I'll, I'll expand more on it,
right? I think it primarily stems from what I
was talking about, about how philosophers and scientists and
academics generally, um come from communities and are in
embedded in communities where morality takes a very peculiar
form, the, the weird form that I talked about,
right? So, um, We tend to think of morality
in terms of doing no harm, um, being kind,
uh, allowing people to express themselves freely, as long
as they're not harming others, um, and being fair.
OK. And, and when you conceive of morality in
those terms, yeah, intuitively, it's bizarre to think, wait,
we'd be better without this? How? Uh, YOU know,
how would I be better? Uh, HOW would we
as a society be better without morality? MOTIVATING us
to be nice or not harming other individuals. If
this was the way, if everybody in the world
shared this weird moral perspective, I would say, yeah,
it, it probably is better for us. But as
I mentioned, this, and as Haight points out, and,
and other anthropologists have shown, this is not the
notion of morality that most of the world shares,
OK? Uh, MOST of the world shares, uh, So,
Heights 5 foundations, just I've talked about them, but
um there's actually 6, but you have uh care,
um, fairness, uh loyalty, authority, sanctity, and then, uh,
freedom, uh, liberty, OK. And whereas liberals and weird
people basically just emphasize care, um, fairness, And liberty,
um, conservatives sort of, uh, or most people's morality,
not including conservatives, uh, give equal weight to all
those foundations, OK? And in fact, studies have shown
they even give less weight to, let's say, care
and fairness than they do to the other ones,
including sanctity and purity, right? Um, AND if we
look at those foundations, we, we see that oftentimes,
Uh, the, the, the binding foundations that bind us
to our community, like loyalty, purity, and, and, uh,
and, um, sanctity, um, oftentimes are, uh, bring about
violence, bring about, uh, conflict within groups, OK? Um,
AND I mean, this is what we're talking, which
Burning, persecution of ethnic minorities, oppression of women, um,
insofar as these, as they usually are, motivated by
morality, it's these foundations, right? And this is what
I think makes it difficult for a lot of
academics to understand that your moral view does not
capture most people's morality, OK? And I, I, I
think, you know, uh, one response there is this,
well, OK, well then we just get rid of
that bad morality and just have, you know, try
to make people adopt our weird kind of morality.
But as I pointed out, If error theory is
correct, and it seems to be, there's no reason
we should expect this to ever occur, right? So,
for someone whose morality is predicated on religion and
purity, and, and deference to authority, you know, um,
them going ahead and stoning, uh, you know, by,
by stoning, I mean, throwing rocks and killing women,
uh, in the Middle East that have been uh
uh convicted of adultery or something, you could say,
you know, you could have a weird person say,
no, you shouldn't do this because it's, it's harming
her, needlessly. Um, THAT'S not gonna resonate with them
at all. They're gonna say, we realize it's harming
her, and she deserves it. Um, YOU know, she
was impure. She violated our religion and our, and
our societal, uh, norms and so forth, right? Um,
AND so, I, I, I think it's pretty much
I, I, I could be wrong about this, and,
and if I am wrong about it, it'd be
nice if the weird morality could perpetuate. It's, it,
again, to this point, it's been having more and
more influence, but certainly, I think with the advent
of social media, perhaps, where people are more in
their sort of echo chambers, um, and maybe not
exposed to arguments in favor of more uh weird
morality or, or utilitarian morality, it's having, uh, uh,
finding less traction among its opponents. And again, I,
I, I think, um, Given that error theory is
probably true, uh, we should not expect, uh, weird
morality to, to spread across the globe, uh, as
it has to this point. So, um, that's in
answer your question then, Ricardo, I think that explains
it. I think people are generally academics, particularly, are,
are, have a very narrow conception of morality that's
not applicable to, to most people.
So let me ask you a little bit about
uh today's problems. What would you say are the
greatest challenges facing us today? And why is it
that, uh, on, I mean, on what grounds is
it that in the book you argue that morality
is also ill-suited to, for dealing with them?
So, I think the best way for, for someone
who's perhaps skeptical of, of uh error theory or
particularly moral abolitionism, uh, to get them to see
why, um, morality is more problematic than helpful, is
again, look at today's political climate, particularly in the
United States, right? Um, Has morality, you know, what,
what role, positive role in, in let's say the
last 10 or 20 years, has morality really played?
Um, CERTAINLY politically and, and, and socially, I, I
think it, it, it's hard to deny that morality
has been more problematic than helpful. So, if we
look at the greatest sort of challenges facing Uh,
you know, the United States, where I, I'm not,
uh, uh, uh, uh, a supporter of Trump. I,
I think that the Trump presidency is, is, is,
uh, causing a lot of problems. Um, IF we
look at gun control, right? Um, WE, we see
that morality is playing a much bigger role in
enabling these kinds of social movements, uh, than opposing
them. Whereas if we just, if, if we took
morality out of the way, right? And and if
we got rid of morality, what would we have?
Well, uh, Um, the, the sort of Christian fundamentalism
that's a driving force in right in, in Republican
politics today, that would fall by the wayside. Um,
THE, the, um, avid supporters of the Second Amendment
that enable our, uh, ludicrous gun laws would fall
by the wayside. Um, IF, if we just relied
on enlightened self-interest, reason, empathy, uh, I, I, I,
I can't imagine, um, some of these policies or,
or, you know, Coming into play or, or, or
somebody like Trump being president. I, it's just very
difficult for me to imagine. Now, certainly, certainly people
could be motivated by self-interest to vote for Trump
or if you're a gun manufacturer to allow for
gun laws, but that would be a very small
amount of people, I think. I, I, I could
be wrong about this again, um, but certainly, morality
seems to be playing a huge role. You know,
the people who oppose social justice in the United
States really see it as reverse discrimination. It's unfair.
It's morally wrong, OK? Um, And also, morality, and
I haven't mentioned this, but one of the real
downsides of morality is that it, uh, Really prevents,
um, it, it promotes dogmatism and prevents sort of
an open discussion of things. If, if you believe,
if you have a moral conviction, um, the neuroscientist
John Deitee actually makes this point in a recent
article, if you have a moral conviction about something,
you're more, much less likely to take opposing views
into consideration, and to call your views in the
uh In question, right? And so we get this
closed-mindedness that, you know, when you combine with the
echo chamber given by social media, and that, you
know, people tend to be, um, particularly Republicans, I
think, uh, in the United States, where, you know,
everybody around you is a Republican, and so they
just kind of reinforce your views. Um, YOU'RE, you're
not really getting exposed to this other sort of
information, um. And so, I, I, I think that
again, morality is gonna play a much bigger, uh
uh uh uh bigger role in, in causing these,
these, these problematic current circumstances we have than preventing
them. Now, I, I could be wrong about this.
Certainly, the left is motivated by uh moral considerations.
Um, BUT, and those moral considerations might turn out
to, to motivate them to, to lead to, to
good outcomes in the future. I'm just very pessimistic
about this, OK? Uh, I, I, I, it, it,
it's uncertain how things are gonna turn out, and
I, and I think again, we, uh, a much
Uh, better, um, uh, we have much better prospects
for, uh, sort of reaching a sort of idealized
utopia where that, that height and pier and singer
favor where people's needs are best met and you
have a good amount of freedom and so forth
in society, if we were to get rid of
morality completely. We, we don't need moral arguments um
to, to argue why it would be a good
thing in a sense, to have a society characterized
by prosperity and inequality and equal rights and these
kinds of things. You, you don't need morality to
do that. I, empathy, self-interest, and reason are enough
to do that. Um, MORALITY, however, is needed to
give a, a, a, a sort of, um, strong,
compelling reason to a lot of people why we
should not have these things.
I have here one final question then, and I
think it's a very important one. Do you think
that it is actually feasible at all to abolish
morality? And I mean, because there are many complications
here, the fact that it has a biological basis,
it is found in every human society ever documented.
And it is sort of a facet of our
existence that is to some extent already ingrained in
our collective psyche. So what do you make of
that?
Yeah. So, right. So, uh, you know, I, I,
I agree that morality is, is, uh, deeply ingrained
in our psyches, that it, uh, in our psyche,
uh, collectively, um, that it's the product of biological
factors. It, it's, you know, culturally ingrained and so
forth. So, is it realistic to think that we
could ever Sort of get from under its influence.
Um, IT may not be possible to completely eradicate
it, uh, from our thoughts, you know, uh, and,
and have these sort of, um, moral, uh, residual
moral elements coming to mind and so forth. But
I certainly think it's possible to downplay them and
suppress morality's influence to the extent where it plays,
um, an increasingly negligible role over our Our deliberations,
our behaviors, and our societies, right? And, and I
think, uh, you know, anecdotally, I, I think in,
in, in, in my life, certainly, I, I, I
think I, I don't really conceive of the world
in moral terms. Moral motivations don't really motivate me
that much, although I still have these sorts of,
for lack of a better word, principles that I
abide by, but I, I don't see them as
being morally justified, right? Um, So, uh, so I,
I think, quick short answer to your question is
yes. I think we can downplay them enough to
where the, the moral abolitionist program can be adopted,
that it is, it is, um, psychologically feasible for
people. And, and one way to think about it,
you know, why think that? Well, think about religion,
right? So, um, I, I think like morality, religion
has an evolutionary basis, like very similar to morality.
I think it helped, uh, in-group, um, bonding and
cooperation. Uh, IT, it, it's obviously very culturally ingrained.
Every society, basically in the history of the world,
uh, has had religion, but we see that its
influence has been decreasing, um, particularly since, um, you
know, the, the Enlightenment period, but really sort of
gained steam in the 20th century and beyond, uh,
to where I think in a lot of people's
lives, growing numbers of people are, are identifying as
agnostic and atheists. Um, AND it's, and it's having
less of an influence, uh, in, in some senses
negligible in, in people's lives. Um, SO, I think
religion gives us good evidence that, yeah, morality can
be something like that, where we can understand by
being exposed to arguments against moral realism that, you
know, I, I, I know I have a tendency
to think of things as good or bad, um,
but, but there's really no basis in reality. Um,
AND, and furthermore, there's actually evidence that That, uh,
moral anti-realism is actually gaining more of a foothold
in countries like the United States. So, uh, Thomas
Posler and, uh, Jennifer Wright in 2020, um, did,
uh, a survey on, on people's moral views. Now,
we should take this with a grain of salt.
I don't, I, I think there are some, some
problems, um. With the study, such that I, I
don't think it's a representative sample of the world
and perhaps not even within the United States. Um,
I believe it was done primarily with college students
and, and, um, uh, Amazon Turk, uh, uh, participants,
right, which, which tend to be uh more Western
industrialized and so forth that, than your average person
around the world. But nonetheless, what they found was,
was pretty eye-opening. So they found um that um
Roughly 23 to 29% of their subjects, which is
significant, um, sided with uh anti-realism, as I understand
it. But more, more importantly, I think, roughly 19
to 20%, according to their surveys, identified as either
non-cognitivists, um, and 4 to 9% even identified as
error theorists, OK? Which, uh, non-cognitivism for, for those
of your viewers who aren't familiar, is basically the
view that That, uh, there are no real moral
truths because there are, in a sense, moral assertions
are just emotional, uh, assertions, right? It's an expression
of emotion. If I say stealing is bad, I'm
basically saying, stealing, boo, don't do that, right? Um,
BUT if you're a non-cognitivist, you're not a moral
realist. You reject moral realism. And so, if their
surveys are right, if they're somewhat representative, um, that
means that we have, again, upwards to 9% of
the US population identifying as um error theorists, and
up to 20% identifying as non-cognitist. Now, I don't
think it's representative, OK? But it's still showing, it
indicates that it's certainly not impossible for people um
to suppress their, their belief and morality in the
way that moral the way role morality plays in
their lives. Um, ON the basis of this, uh,
on the basis of these considerations, I don't think
it's a stretch to say That as arguments for
error theory, um, and perhaps arguments for moral abolitionism
become more well known, more expressed, uh, philosophers, moral
psychologists start to, to, to see, uh, the, the,
the merits of these arguments that they'll gain more
of attraction in the academic public, uh, academic world,
and in the world beyond. So, um, You know,
what's gonna happen in the future? I don't know.
Certainly, I think moral abolitionism and and uh moral
error theory are uh minority views among uh philosophers,
but I, I, I think the numbers are growing,
and I think that's attributable to the fact that
the, the arguments in favor of them are very
strong, and hopefully, again, my book will help, uh,
Increase this trend. Cause I, I, I really do
think, um, that overall society and would benefit from
the adoption of moral abolitionism. I mean, morality doesn't
seem to be working. I don't think it's worked
for a long time. Um, I, I think it's
try to time to try something different. And I
think that moral abolitionism is, is, um, Much more
grounded in reality than uh than moral realism is.
Great. So the book is again moral damages, the
case for abolishing morality, and of course, I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview. And uh Doctor Morris, apart from the book,
are there any places on the internet where people
can find your work?
So I do have a website where that has
a link to my CV, uh, and, and some
of my uh research. It's uh uh Steven GeorgeMorris.com,
all one word. Um. And, and, uh, beyond that,
uh, you can contact me, uh, through email, um,
at my institution, the College of Staten Island. So,
um, yeah, uh, let's get the dialogue going. I,
I, I realize, uh, a lot of people are
gonna disagree with what I, what I've, uh, said,
uh, at least some aspects, but, uh, again, I
think the compelling, uh, there is a lot of
compelling evidence in, in favor of the conclusions that
I draw, and I'm, I'd be interested about coming
across, um, empirical evidence or, or, uh, philosophical arguments
to the contrary. And uh yeah.
OK, so great. Thank you so much again for
taking the time to come on the show. It's
been a very interesting conversation.
Thank you very much for having me, Ricardo. I
appreciate it and I, I think you do a
great job with your channel.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrook
field governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro
and Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, asila dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bartolotti
Gabriel Pons Corteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani
Smith John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau,
Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David
Williams, Diota Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry V. Lee Junior,
old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren,
Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike
Levin, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.